Those things which have been demonstrated of curve lines and the superficies which they comprehend, may be easily applied to the curve superficies and contents of solids. These lemmas are premised, to avoid the tediousness of deducing perplexed demonstrations ad absurdum, according to the method of the ancient geometers. For demonstrations are more contracted by the method of indivisibles: but because the hypothesis of indivisibles seems somewhat harsh, and therefore that method is reckoned less geometrical, I chose rather to reduce the demonstrations of the following propositions to the first and last sums and ratio's of nascent and evanescent quantities, that is, to the limits of those sums and ratio's; and so to premise, as short as I could, the demonstrations of those limits. For hereby the same thing is perform'd as by the method of indivisibles; and now those principles being demonstrated, we may use them with more safety. Therefore if hereafter, I should happen to consider quantities as made up of particles, or should use little curve lines for right ones; I would not be understood to mean indivisibles, but evanescent divisible quantities; not the sums and ratio's of determinate parts, but always the limits of sums and ratio's: and that the force of such demonstrations always depends on the method lay'd down in the foregoing lemma's.

Perhaps it may be objected, that there is no ultimate proportion of evanescent quantities; because the proportion, before the quantities have vanished, is not the ultimate, and when they are vanished, is none. But by the same argument it may be alledged, that a body arriving at a certain place, and there slopping, has no ultimate velocity: because the velocity, before the body comes to the place, is not its ultimate velocity; when it has arrived, is none. But the answer is easy; for by the ultimate velocity is meant that with which the body is moved, neither besore it arrives at its last place and the motion ceases, nor after, but at the very instant it arrives; that is, that velocity with which the body arrives at its last place, and with which the motion ceases. And in like manner, by the ultimate ratio of evanescent quantities is to be understood the ratio of the quantities, not before they vanish, nor afterwards, but with which they vanish. In like manner the first ratio of nascent quantities is that with which they begin to be. And the first or last sum is that with which they begin and cease to be (or to be augmented or diminished.) There is a limit which the velocity at the end of the motion may attain, but not exceed. This is the ultimate velocity. And there is the like limit in all quantities and proportions that begin and cease to be. And since such limits are certain and definite, to determine the same is a problem strictly geometrical. But whatever is geometrical we may be allowed to use in determining and demonstrating any other thing that is likewise geometrical.

It may also be objected, that if the ultimate ratio's of evanescent quantities are given, their ultimate magnitudes will be also given: and so all quantities will consist of indivisibles, which is contrary to what Euclid has demonstrated concerning incommensurable, in the 10th book of his Elements. But this objection is founded on a false supposition. For those ultimate ratio's with which quantities vanish, are not truly the ratio's of ultimate quantities, but limits towards which the ratio's of quantities, decreasing without limit, do always converge; and to which they approach nearer than by any given difference, but never go beyond, nor in effect attain to, till the quantities are diminished in infinitum. This thing will appear more evident in quantities infinitely great. If two quantities, whose difference is given, be augmented in infinitum, the ultimate ratio of these quantities will be given, to wit, the ratio of equality; but it does not from thence follow, that the ultimate or greatest quantities themselves, whose ratio that is, will be given. Therefore if in what follows, for the sake of being more easily understood, I should happen to mention quantities as least, or evanescent, or ultimate; you are not to suppose that quantities of any determinate magnitude are meant, but such as are conceiv'd to be always diminished without end.